Deployment Guide
1. Infrastructure Setup
Set Up a Virtual Machine or Cloud Instance:

Choose a provider (AWS, Azure, DigitalOcean, etc.).
Provision a virtual machine with appropriate resources (CPU, memory, storage).
Ensure the VM has adequate network access and security settings.
Install Necessary Tools and Dependencies:

Node.js and npm/Yarn: Install Node.js and npm (or Yarn) for Next.js application.
Python and pip: Install Python and pip for Django application.
Docker and Docker Compose (Optional): Install Docker and Docker Compose if containerization is preferred.
2. Next.js Application Deployment
Clone the Next.js Codebase:

bash
git clone https://github.com/soulpage/fullstack-assignment.git
cd fullstack-assignment/nextjs-app
Install Dependencies:

bash
npm install
Configure Environment Variables:

Copy .env.example to .env and configure necessary environment variables (if any).
Build and Start Next.js Application:

bash
npm run build
npm start
Verify the application is accessible via http://localhost:3000.
3. Django Application Deployment
Clone the Django Codebase:

bash
git clone https://github.com/soulpage/fullstack-assignment.git
cd fullstack-assignment/django-app
Set Up Virtual Environment and Install Dependencies:

bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows use `venv\Scripts\activate`
pip install -r requirements.txt
Configure Environment Variables:

Configure database settings, secret key, and other environment variables in .env or settings file.
Apply Migrations and Create Superuser:

bash
python manage.py migrate
python manage.py createsuperuser
Deploy Django Application:

Using Gunicorn and Nginx (example):
Install Gunicorn:
bash
pip install gunicorn
Start Gunicorn server :
bash
gunicorn your_project_name.wsgi:application
Configure Nginx to serve Django application.
4. Monitoring Setup (Optional)
Set Up Monitoring Tools:
Install and configure tools like New Relic, Prometheus, Grafana for monitoring metrics (CPU, memory, response time, etc.).
Set up dashboards and alerts for critical metrics.
5. Continuous Integration and Deployment (CI/CD)
Set Up CI/CD Pipeline:

Use tools like Jenkins, GitHub Actions, or GitLab CI for automated testing, building, and deploying applications on every push.
Example .gitlab-ci.yml for Django application:

stages:
  - test
  - deploy

test:
  stage: test
  script:
    - python manage.py test

deploy:
  stage: deploy
  script:
    - echo "Deploy script here"
    # Example: Deploy using SSH, Docker, or other methods
6. Database Backups and Restoration
Implement Database Backup Strategy:

Create scripts or use tools (e.g., pg_dump for PostgreSQL) to automate regular backups.
Store backups securely in a remote location (AWS S3, Azure Blob Storage, etc.).
Restore Database from Backup:

Create a script to restore databases from backups in case of data loss.
7. Dockerization (Optional)
Create Dockerfiles:

Create Dockerfiles for Next.js and Django applications to containerize them.
Docker Compose for Multi-Container Deployment:

Set up Docker Compose to manage multi-container deployments (Next.js, Django, databases).
Ensure Applications Communicate Effectively:

Configure networking and environment variables in Docker Compose for seamless communication between containers.
8. Centralized Logging (Optional)
Set Up ELK Stack:

Use Elasticsearch, Logstash, and Kibana (ELK stack) for centralized logging.
Configure applications to send logs to Logstash or Elasticsearch for aggregation and visualization.
Integrate Applications with Logging System:

Configure application logging to send logs to ELK stack using Filebeat, Logstash, or direct Elasticsearch integration.
● Document the monitoring setup, including the tools used, metrics monitored, and
alerting configuration.
● Provide guidelines for routine maintenance tasks.

Monitoring Setup Documentation
Monitoring setup is crucial for ensuring the health, performance, and availability of applications. Below is a documentation of the monitoring setup including tools used, metrics monitored, and alerting configuration.

Tools Used
Prometheus:

Purpose: Metrics collection and storage.
Setup: Deployed as a Docker container with appropriate configurations.
Integration: Configured to scrape metrics from application endpoints and services.
Grafana:

Purpose: Visualization and dashboarding.
Setup: Deployed as a Docker container with dashboards created to monitor Prometheus metrics.
Integration: Connected to Prometheus for data visualization.
Alertmanager:

Purpose: Alert management and routing.
Setup: Configured alongside Prometheus to handle alerts based on predefined rules.
Integration: Integrated with Prometheus to receive alert notifications.
Metrics Monitored
Application Metrics:

Next.js Application:
HTTP request rates and response times.
Memory and CPU usage.
Error rates and status codes.
Django Application:
Request rates and response times.
Database query times and transaction rates.
Error rates and HTTP status codes.
Infrastructure Metrics:

System-level Metrics:
CPU utilization.
Memory usage.
Disk I/O metrics.
Network traffic.
Database Metrics:

PostgreSQL (Example):
Query latency and throughput.
Connections and locks.
Buffer pool hit ratios.
Alerting Configuration
Alert Rules:

Defined in Prometheus configuration (prometheus.yml).
Example rules:
High CPU usage (>80% for 5 minutes).
Application error rate exceeding threshold.
Disk space utilization above 90%.
Alertmanager Configuration:

Configured to receive alerts from Prometheus.
Routing and notification configuration based on severity and target (e.g., email, Slack).
Notification Channels:

Email: Configured to send alerts to relevant team members.
Slack: Integrated for real-time alert notifications to designated channels.
Guidelines for Routine Maintenance Tasks
Routine maintenance tasks ensure the stability and performance of the monitoring setup and applications.

Regular Backup and Updates:

Prometheus and Grafana: Regularly backup configuration and data.
Update Prometheus and Grafana versions as new releases are available.
Monitoring Configuration Review:

Periodically review and update Prometheus alert rules based on application changes and performance patterns.
Update Grafana dashboards to reflect new metrics or changes in application architecture.
Capacity Planning:

Monitor resource usage trends (CPU, memory, disk) and plan for capacity upgrades or optimizations as needed.
Security Audits:

Regularly audit access controls and configurations for Prometheus, Grafana, and Alertmanager.
Apply security patches and updates promptly.
Incident Response Practice:

Conduct regular drills to test alerting and incident response procedures.
Review and refine runbooks for handling common issues identified through monitoring.
Document the CI/CD pipeline setup, including the tools used and configuration
files.
Setting up a CI/CD pipeline is crucial for automating the testing, building, and deployment of applications, ensuring consistency and efficiency in software delivery. Below is a documentation of the CI/CD pipeline setup, including the tools used and configuration files.

CI/CD Pipeline Setup Documentation
Tools Used
GitHub Actions:

Purpose: Automation of CI/CD workflows directly integrated with GitHub repositories.
Setup: Utilize YAML configuration files (workflow files) stored in the .github/workflows directory of the repository.
Docker:

Purpose: Containerization of applications to ensure consistency between development, testing, and production environments.
Setup: Dockerfiles define the build environment and runtime dependencies for each application.
Python unittest and pytest:

Purpose: Testing frameworks for unit and integration tests in the Django application.
Setup: Configure test suites to run automatically during CI workflows.
Node.js jest and react-testing-library:

Purpose: Testing frameworks for unit and integration tests in the Next.js application.
Setup: Define test scripts and configurations in the package.json file of the Next.js application.
Deployment Scripts:

Purpose: Scripts to automate deployment tasks, including Docker image building, tagging, and pushing to a container registry.
Setup: Integrated within CI/CD workflows to deploy applications to staging or production environments.
Configuration Files
GitHub Actions Workflow (.github/workflows/ci-cd.yml):

Example workflow file for a Django application:



name: CI/CD Pipeline

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - name: Checkout repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v2

      - name: Set up Python
        uses: actions/setup-python@v2
        with:
          python-version: '3.x'

      - name: Install dependencies
        run: |
          python -m pip install --upgrade pip
          pip install -r requirements.txt

      - name: Run tests
        run: |
          python manage.py test

      - name: Build and push Docker image
        env:
          REGISTRY: ghcr.io
          IMAGE_NAME: my-django-app
          TAG: latest
        run: |
          docker build -t $REGISTRY/$GITHUB_REPOSITORY/$IMAGE_NAME:$TAG .
          docker login -u ${{ github.actor }} -p ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }} $REGISTRY
          docker push $REGISTRY/$GITHUB_REPOSITORY/$IMAGE_NAME:$TAG

Explanation:

Trigger: Runs on every push to the main branch.
Steps:
Checks out the repository.
Sets up Python environment and installs dependencies.
Runs unit tests using pytest or unittest.
Builds a Docker image, tags it, and pushes it to GitHub Container Registry (ghcr.io).
Next.js Application Deployment (.github/workflows/ci-cd-nextjs.yml):

Example workflow file for a Next.js application:


name: CI/CD Pipeline - Next.js

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - name: Checkout repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v2

      - name: Set up Node.js
        uses: actions/setup-node@v2
        with:
          node-version: '14.x'

      - name: Install dependencies
        run: npm install

      - name: Run tests
        run: npm test

      - name: Build Next.js app
        run: npm run build

      - name: Deploy to production
        run: |
          npm install -g vercel
          vercel --token ${{ secrets.VERCEL_TOKEN }} --prod

Explanation:

Trigger: Runs on every push to the main branch.
Steps:
Checks out the repository.
Sets up Node.js environment and installs dependencies.
Runs tests using jest or other testing frameworks.
Builds the Next.js application.
Deploys the built application to production using Vercel 
Guidelines for Usage
Commit Workflow: Ensure that all code changes are committed and pushed to the repository's main branch to trigger the CI/CD pipeline.

Secrets Management: Store sensitive information (like Docker registry credentials, deployment tokens) securely using GitHub Secrets or other secure vaults.

Artifact Management: Use Docker images or deployment artifacts generated during CI/CD pipelines for deployment to staging or production environments.

Pipeline Monitoring: Monitor CI/CD pipelines for failures or issues, and configure notifications/alerts for timely intervention.

Continuous Improvement: Regularly review and optimize CI/CD workflows based on feedback, performance metrics, and changes in application requirements.

